Citation version 1:
"Verein für Deutsche Statistik: Zeitschrift des Vereins für Deutsche
Statistik. 2. 1848"
https://www.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/view/bsb10709532?page=1142

Citation version 2:
https://opacplus.bsb-muenchen.de/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=alma991025457649707356&context=L&vid=49BVB_BSB:VU1
Zeitschrift des Vereins für Deutsche Statistik. 2. 1848
Verein für Deutsche Statistik | GND-ID: (DE-588)82912-2
1848
Zeitschrift des Vereins für Deutsche Statistik.

Page 1104

On the circumstances of Einlieger in the principalities of Lippe-Detmold
and Schaumburg-Lippe†, by Pastor Georg Funke in Menslage near Osnabrück.

                        I.
According to the 1846 census (Journal for German Statistics 1847 p. 1059),
the principality of Lippe-Detmold has 106,046 inhabitants living in an area
of 20⅗ square miles.

Footnotes:

† In the preface to my work “On the Present Situation of the Day Laborers
in the Principality of Osnabrück, with Special Reference to the Causes of
Their Decline and with a View to the Means of Their Improvement”
(Bielefeld, 1847), I invited contributions concerning the condition of the
landless rural population in northwestern Germany, since I intend to
present a more comprehensive account of the circumstances of this class,
which lives in great hardship. From some quarters I have already received
such communications, for which I here publicly express my thanks; however,
they are still lacking from many regions. I therefore repeat my earlier
request and note at the same time that contributors will, in due course,
receive a copy of the forthcoming work as a token of my gratitude. Such
communications may be sent to me through the booksellers Hahn in Hanover
and Rackhorst in Osnabrück. — The following article has been prepared on
the basis of private communications received.

Page 1105

In 1834, the population was 98,428 (97,720), and by 1840 it had risen to
104,462, so that the average increase in population can be assumed to be
0.7 percent. There are an average of 5,148 inhabitants per square mile.
This is a population density that is found in few German states. Only the
Kingdom of Saxony (with 6,760 inhabitants per square mile), the Grand Duchy
of Hesse (with 5,578 inhabitants per square mile), the Duchy of
Saxe-Altenburg (with 5,367 inhabitants per square mile) and the
Principality of Reuss-Greiz (with 5,170 inhabitants per square mile) are
even more densely populated. Let us now consider that the Principality of
Lippe is by no means entirely fertile and cultivated, but rather is
mountainous and unsuitable for cultivation, with large forests and some
heathland and only small towns, we must conclude that there must be very
peculiar circumstances that enable the country to feed such a dense
population, especially since trade and factories are not of great
importance. These very peculiar circumstances will become apparent to us
when we consider the situation of the so-called Einlieger, who until
recently were considered in this journal (p. 639) as not having the right
to vote in municipal affairs.

1. Origin of the Einlieger.

Since the end of the last century, the landless rural population in the
Principality of Lippe has grown to such an extent that, as is the case in
the Principality of Osnabrück, it now exceeds the number of landowners by a
factor of two on average.  As these landless rural dwellers are called
"Heuerleute" or "Heuerlinge" in our region, from "heuern" (to hire), i.e.
to rent for a year (this year), they are called "Einlieger" in Lippe
because they live with others, i.e. reside with them.  These "Einlieger,"
to whom rent for a year (heuern = this year), they are called Einlieger in
Lippe because they live with others, i.e., they reside with them. These
Einlieger, who currently make up about two-thirds of the total rural
population, were found in very small numbers in the Principality of Lippe
until the middle of the last century, and in some areas, not at all. Until
then, the younger sons of farm owners who did not have the opportunity to
marry into other farms or move into other circumstances either settled on
uncultivated land in a village or built their own homes in the common lands
belonging to the village, also known as heaths.  In this way, many small
landowners emerged, and even, as the common lands were gradually
cultivated, small villages were formed, which were then usually named after
the villages or estates from which the colonization originated (Hölser-,
Herser-, Wülferheide, etc.).  In general, there is in Lippe a tendency to
live together in villages rather than in scattered rural communities, as is
more typical of Westphalia proper, where farmsteads are separated from one
another by greater or lesser distances. However, the villages in Lippe are
not as compact as those found in regions where the Engern and Eastphalian
settlement forms, in contrast to the Westphalian, appear in their clearly
defined form.

MY COMMENTS: Einlieger comes from the now obsolete regional verb einliegen
that had the mean of "to reside in someone else’s dwelling; to live as a
lodger / co-resident ".

The small landowners who emerged later, new builders, new residents, or, as
they are called in the vernacular, Hoppenplöcker, owned virtually no land
before the division of the commons, with a few exceptions, apart from some
garden land, which was probably allocated to them as soon as they were
given permission to cultivate it.
 
Page 1106

Initially, they earned their living by working as day laborers on farms,
where they also hired out their children as servants. As their numbers
grew, the work they found in the country was no longer sufficient to
support them, so they sought work abroad and, like their neighbors in
Westphalia proper, turned to Holland, West Friesland, Groningen, and the
neighboring areas. It is well known that in those days, when trade was
significant in the United Netherlands, manual labor brought rich profits
here due to a shortage of workers. As soon as the sons had grown up, they
followed their fathers. This temporary emigration of the working population
during the summer created a shortage of workers in their homeland,
especially during the season when extra help was most needed on the farms.
As was the case here in Osnabrück, farm owners complained about this in
many ways and also approached the state governments to put restrictions on
this temporary emigration. Möser says in this regard that the landowners
believed that the state existed for their sake. No wonder, then, that they
believed that the state should provide them with workers by prohibiting
them from going to Holland for low wages. Incidentally, as in Osnabrück,
the state government in Lippe did not reject the complaints lodged for this
reason, but recognized them as justified. With regard to Lippe, we do not
know of any specific regulations, but we have been informed that such
regulations were enacted, without success, however. The situation here
will not have been any different from that in our former bishopric. As
early as 1608, Bishop Philipp Sigismund spoke out against the estates,
saying that complaints had been received about the servants and laborers,
that no one wanted to serve, which caused embarrassment to the hereditary
farmers and citizens, and that, on the contrary, the unmarried people were
leaving for Friesland and other places outside the the diocese, where they
could earn more in a shorter time, and then return at their leisure; that,
furthermore, the wages paid to the laborers were excessive, etc., which is
why it should be carefully considered whether police regulations should be
enacted for such cases. Although we are of the opinion that in earlier
times there were still many sources of income, it was in any case wrong to
restrict employment abroad by police measures for the sake of ensuring that
the locals could obtain cheap day laborers and servants. It was only
natural that these measures were fruitless.

The consequence of this temporary emigration was the emergence of so-called
Einlieger (lodgers) in the Lippe region. In order to attract workers, farm
owners gradually began to take married couples into their homes on a rental
basis (to let them live with them) as the population grew, on the condition
that they would work for a certain daily wage if required. At first, there
were no special dwellings for the Einlieger. The empty farm buildings were
used initially. Later, however, special houses had to be built, which were
usually furnished for two families. They can now be found on almost all
farms. The following example shows the extent to which this landless
population of Einlieger has increased in the Lippe region in recent times.
A farm owner told me that in 1772, when his grandfather married into the
farm he now owns, there were only 5-6 Einlieger (lodgers) in the village;
in 1846, however, when he compiled the list of Einlieger (lodgers), their
number had risen to 110; the number of landowners, on the other hand, was
relatively small; among the 39, there were only 10 larger peasant farmers
who kept four or more horses, and 10 others, each of whom plowed 20–60
(Lippe)

Page 1107

bushels of seed, some with cows; The rest were small owners (Hoppenplöcker)
who owned no land other than the common land that had fallen to them or
even just their small gardens; in addition, there was also a noble estate
there.

As a consequence of the increase in the number of Einlieger, the common
land had to be shared. The lodgers drove their cattle onto the common
pastures without restriction, so that these — especially since Lippe as a
whole possesses little pasture land — were excessively grazed and, as
pasture, produced very little return.  It was not without reason that small
landowners complained that the larger ones, with their own cattle and that
of their lodgers, were using the common land disproportionately. These
constant complaints led to the common land being divided up almost
everywhere in order to put an end to this. Given the dense population of
the country and the low yield that the commons generally provided in this
sparsely irrigated area, the division may have been expedient insofar as it
gained new terrain for cultivation, even if it did not improve the
situation of the Einlieger. We are not in favor of the unconditional
division of common land, as was mostly the case in the Principality of
Osnabrück, without there being any need for it, but rather believe that a
limited division, appropriate to the increased population, would have
brought greater advantages; however, we readily acknowledge that in Lippe,
where such large commons as exist here did not exist at all, the conditions
were significantly different. Since the terrain in Lippe is not very
suitable for grazing, the divided commons, if cultivated, will certainly
yield on average twice as much as was previously the case. Of course, some
areas will remain that are either completely unsuitable for cultivation or
will only yield if existing productive forces can be introduced to
stimulate new ones.

2. The sources of income of the tenant farmers.

The manual laboring classes in the Principality of Lippe, which include not
only the Einlieger (lodgers) but also the small landowners who live in the
same circumstances, earn their livelihood primarily from the linen industry
and then from brickwork abroad.

a. In the aforementioned document “On the Situation of Day Laborers, etc.,”
we discussed the decline of the linen industry in general. What we reported
also applies to the Lippe region; at present, a family of manual laborers,
even with all their diligence, can no longer earn a living solely from the
domestic industry of flax or hemp, given the spread of machine spinning and
weaving. Spinning and weaving can now only be regarded as secondary work.
Overall, however, the linen industry in Lippe was already less important
than in Ravensberg, Minden, Osnabrück, etc., which is why the decline of
the German linen trade has not had such a drastic negative impact as in the
aforementioned regions, where the landless population was often entirely
dependent on spinning and weaving for their livelihood, and where, due to
changed circumstances, no work to replace this cottage industry has yet
been found and is unlikely to be found. As is well known, England has
excluded us from the linen trade almost everywhere, so that in the end only
Cuba remained for the sale of our products, where it has now also made
inroads. With the ever-expanding cotton production in America,

Seite 1108

even in the West Indies, cotton fabrics have partially replaced linen
fabrics. Incidentally, this can only be the case to a certain extent, as
there is no more suitable clothing for tropical countries than the very
durable and cooling linen fabric. Therefore, it is to be expected that,
despite the machines for the domestic linen industry, a more favorable time
will come once the political conditions in tropical America have stabilized
and if we do not fail to establish favorable direct trade relations with
it. On the one hand, hand-spun linen, with its greater strength and
durability and other advantages, will then hold its own alongside
machine-made linen, and on the other hand, the industry of the landless
population will turn to the more careful processing of flax for the
machines.

In Lippe, according to a report by a Kolon (??), around 20–30 years ago, 12
pieces of so-called  Kaufgarn were delivered for one taler; currently,
15–18 pieces are given for one taler. It has been claimed that the
difference in earnings cannot be that great, since nowadays spinning is
done with two hands throughout, which was not the case in the past.
However, it should be noted that, although nowadays two hands may spin 4
pieces of yarn instead of the previous 2 or 2½ pieces, this yarn is of
poorer quality and that as many as 36 pieces had to be delivered for one
taler. Of course, spinning with two hands requires twice as much flax. If
this is purchased, one receives 7 pounds unpurified for one taler, of which
approximately 4–5 pounds remain after purification, from which the spinner
can spin only 36 pieces with great difficulty pieces; therefore, the work
would have to be done for nothing if only one taler is given for 36 pieces.
Meanwhile, even with higher prices for yarn, the earnings are so low that a
family dependent on spinning cannot survive at all. Usually, the flax is
not purchased, but is grown by the tenants and small landowners themselves;
but then they have to rent the land suitable for flax cultivation, buy the
flax seeds, and, at a time when manual labor is well paid, use it for the
preparation of the flax.  Of course, there is still a profit to be made if
the flax is grown by the spinner himself, since his own labor is valued
less highly than it is paid ; however, there are also many areas where it
does not thrive particularly well or at all, in which case the only option
is to buy it raw, if one wants to engage in spinning in one's spare time at
all. It is not uncommon, however, for larger landowners to grow flax for
their tenant farmers on their fields for a cheap price. Similarly, servants
working for larger landowners are given some flax to grow.  There is still
much to be desired in terms of flax processing, but more care has been
taken with spinning in recent times.  However, if spinning is done with two
hands, only very ordinary yarn can be produced.

b. A very peculiar source of income for the Lippe working class is
bricklaying abroad, or what is known as “going to Holland.” Just as here in
northern Osnabrück, the peat diggers who go to Holstein, Schleswig,
Brandenburg, East and West Prussia, and Posen because they first went to
Holstein and Schleswig, so too in Lippe all bricklayers working abroad are
called “Hollandsgänger” or “Friesländer” because they first went to Holland
and Friesland, although a very large proportion of them emigrate
temporarily in the opposite direction . People from Lippe also go to West
Friesland and Groningen as peat diggers, and less frequently as other types
of manual laborers, e.g., as grass cutters, gardeners, bricklayers,
carpenters, glue cooks, etc., as is the case in the Principality of
Osnabrück.

Bricklaying has been practiced since ancient times by the lower classes in
the Principality of Lippe, but for about 25 years it has been transferred
from the small landowners to the lodgers. As a result of the division of
common land, the latter received plots that were not particularly large,
but often quite suitable for cultivation, which they now cultivated
themselves. This internal colonization only kept the small landowners in
their homeland, as agriculture, which had previously been a sideline, now
became their main occupation. Since brickmaking has increasingly been taken
over by tenant farmers, it has gained in popularity. It is native to the
Lippe region, and the skill in it seems to be passed down from one
generation to the next; therefore, this work in foreign brickworks can be
considered secure for the future. Overall, it brings in around 400,000
thalers annually to the country.  Even if earnings are low in some areas at
times, the messenger masters or brick messengers employed by the government
always know how to find new ways. Two messenger masters are employed for
Friesland and Holland, where they conclude contracts and hire workers in
Lippe. In this way, every brick worker is assured of his earnings, because
if contracts are not fulfilled, he can seek recourse from the messenger
master, who is obliged to represent him before the authorities. The
messenger masters make their trips to Friesland (i.e., West Friesland and
Groningen) and Holland twice a year, once to conclude the contracts and
then to check the fulfillment of the contracts during the work.

Depending on how favorable the circumstances are, an adult brick worker
earns between 40 and 60 thaler in pure money during the six months of his
absence.  It is not uncommon for individual masters to bring back over 100,
even 200 thaler. In dry summers, when the clay from which the bricks are
made dries quickly and can therefore be fired more frequently, earnings are
highest. Of lesser importance is the other manual labor performed by the
Lippe settlers in "Friesland"; this consists mainly of peat digging. The
earnings are lower, but these peat diggers also spend less time away from
home. In about three months, they now earn 15–20, at most 25 thalers; they
leave in April and return towards the end of June or July. However, their
work is harder and unhealthy, as it must be done in wet conditions.†

Footnotes:

†Ref. has often roamed on foot the classic soil of the Principality of
Lippe, where Hermann once defeated Varus and where now, on the summit of
the Teutoburg Forest Mountains, the unfortunately still unfinished monument
to the German hero rises. On one such occasion, he met a lodger who told
him that he had previously gone to Friesland as a peat digger. He stated
his earnings at around 20 thalers; sometimes he had to deduct his travel
expenses from this, sometimes he had even more. This worker can serve as an
example of how little money is needed to travel from Lippe to Friesland.
He said that on the outward journey, where he took some food with him from
home, he did not need a full thaler, but on the return journey, where he
did not have any food with him, he did not always manage with that amount.
He said that they had mostly eaten only bread on the way; only once, in
Haselünne, where they always stayed with a butcher, had they eaten a hot
dinner; the meal had been so good that it would not have been better for a
wedding, as they had been served soup with beef and then sauerkraut with
bacon or ham; including overnight accommodation (on hay) and the coffee
enjoyed the next morning, they paid a total of 7 Mgr., which was not too
much, but the trip would have been too expensive for them if they had
wanted to spend that much on every overnight stay.  —— One can see what
these workers endure on the road.

Page 1110

Despite the fact that foreign bricklaying work brings the lodgers very
significant earnings, landowners claim that it has had little beneficial
effect on the lodgers' circumstances.  Those who engage in this work do not
pursue any other occupation; they are to be regarded as factory workers who
rest from their work in winter and cannot be employed elsewhere in the
country.  take a break from their work in winter and cannot find other
employment in the country.  The young men engaged in this bricklaying work
are also left too much to their own devices, usually spending in winter
what they have earned in summer, without thinking that they need to put
something aside for later years, especially the younger ones.  Therefore,
in the long run, those who serve the colonists are better off, even though
they only receive 20-30 thalers a year in wages.  In addition, the more
varied economic work, and in general the intimate connection between
agriculture and the ever-changing nature, does not dull the spirit; rather,
because man does not work alone but must come from above, the direct
emotional connection to God is maintained, which cannot be said of
factory-like brickwork. In the latter, the principle of division of labor
prevails, on which the relatively large earnings are based; meanwhile, if a
person has to do the same thing for six months earnings; meanwhile, if a
person has to do the same thing for six months, they become mentally
dulled, and it is therefore a completely natural phenomenon that, like
factory workers in general, the so-called Frieslanders also appear to be
morally far more unstable than the young men who remain on the farms as
farmhands.

Bricklaying abroad has a very special appeal for the lower classes, so that
a few years ago, after the Hamburg fire, where it became most widespread,
all the young men from the tenant farming community emigrated. As a result,
the Lippe farm owners had to recruit most of their farmhands from
neighboring Prussian Westphalia, where bricklaying is not practiced, and
still have to do so today. This has also led to an increase in the number
of people without property. The foreign farmhands working in Lippe form
relationships with the girls there and then settle there, unless the girls
remain behind with their children, which only contributes to the increase
in poverty, apart from the further negative consequences in moral terms, if
they marry them.  The landowners generally prefer to take them in as
lodgers in their homes rather than the so-called Frisians, who know little
about rural work and are absent in the summer, so that no help can be
expected from them. Therefore, when the Frisians want to marry, they prefer
to find accommodation with small landowners because they do not have to
commit to any work and can therefore continue their periodic emigration.
If such a homeowner can spare any space, they try to persuade him to have
it converted into a separate apartment . As long as such a couple has no or
only a few children, they can make do with the cramped dwelling, especially
since the man is absent for most of the year; but if they have several
children and these grow up, the family can hardly cope with such a cramped
dwelling, especially in winter, when the grown-up sons, who went abroad
with their father after confirmation, abroad, have returned home with their
father, can hardly bear to live in such a cramped dwelling. Parents and
children, sons and daughters, young and old, all have to

Page 1111

sleep in one room, which must have a detrimental effect not only on their
physical health but also on their morals. In most cases, these brickworkers
are blessed with many children.  Under such circumstances , young people
cannot be blamed for trying to find their own apartment as soon as
possible, even if it is worse than their parents' , in order to get married
and start their own household. In this way, the number of lodgers in Lippe
has increased in a manner that is not commensurate with the size of the
country and its culture , with the result that the country has lost much of
its prosperity as a result of this increase in the propertyless population,
since, despite the significant earnings abroad, the sources of income are
still not sufficient to support the lower classes. We may call the country
overpopulated, for the number of propertyless inhabitants has increased
abnormally in relation to the number of property owners , so that the two
are out of proportion to each other. However, the cause of this
overpopulation must be regarded as foreign bricklaying, as can be seen from
our description.

Initially carried out by small landowners who could not find sufficient
sources of income in their homeland, bricklaying work was transferred to
the tenants after the division of common land, as the former now devoted
themselves more to agriculture. Once the tenants had taken over the
brickworks, they multiplied all the more rapidly, as they now also had the
opportunity, thanks to the small landowners, to obtain accommodation which,
if they emigrated temporarily, the farm owners could not always provide, as
they needed the economic labor of those tenants who remained in the
country. The final result was that, although the country was already
overpopulated, nevertheless, because bricklaying work abroad was becoming
increasingly widespread, the farm owners had to hire foreign laborers, who
then even settled in this overpopulated country.  We hardly need to add
that the increase in population at present, where there are already 5,148
inhabitants per square mile, cannot increase much more, and that the ratio
of the propertied to the propertyless must not become more unfavorable than
it already is if both are to survive at all. Even now, when two-thirds of
the rural population are propertyless, these propertyless inhabitants are
an excessive burden on the property owners, especially in times of
misfortune and in years of hardship, as is now the case, if the population
were to increase at the same rate as it has since 1819, when it stood at
72,000! There is no other remedy for overpopulation here than emigration,
which is already taking place in many ways; for there is little or no land
left here for internal colonization. We will come back to this later.

c. Some of the lodgers in Lippe remain in the country during the summer
and, in addition to their own small-scale farming, work as day laborers on
the colonates. Although the earnings of these lodgers are lower, they are
generally still better off.  Although they cannot work their way up to
great prosperity, they are more secure against impoverishment than the
migrant population, which is generally less thrifty and whose earnings
depend too much on external circumstances. The current tenancy agreements
have been in place for many years and, if both parties are honest, are
still reasonable. Such a lodger who works for his Meier (the general name
for a farm owner in Lippe) on a daily wage usually pays four to six talers
in rent for the apartment and three talers for the necessary garden land.
In addition, he receives 1½ to 2 bushels of flax seed, for which 1½ to 2
thalers per bushel are paid, depending on the different regions. His other
needs

Page 1112

for wood, boards, piglets, etc. are also provided by the Meier. He also
usually receives a few bushels of seed from the Meier for his farmland, but
this is not contractually fixed. The lodger is obliged to work for the
Meier as often as he requests, for which he receives 2½ Sgr. per day in
addition to board . On some noble estates and larger farms, the so-called
large daily wage has been introduced in recent times, 5–8 Sgr. for the
worker per day, but this does not seem to be to his advantage.  There are
no unspecified services provided by lodgers.  However, farm owners often
take advantage of their day laborers' dependence in an inappropriate
manner. It would be particularly desirable for them to provide the lodgers
with better accommodation, for the latter is sometimes of such a nature
that it would be far more equitable for the people who endure it for a year
to receive four talers in compensation than to have to pay this amount.

The extent to which these lodgers who remain in the country are
sufficiently employed or not depends on the insight and competence of the
farm owners with whom they live. An active and prudent farmer will keep his
lodgers busy in order to increase the existing soil fertility or awaken new
fertility, which is not possible without work. If, on the other hand, there
is a lack of understanding of the nature of agriculture, and it is only
carried out mechanically without any thought of further training, then even
if it is not always outright laziness, it is usually a case of misplaced
thriftiness. In this case, a farm owner will try to spend as little as
possible on daily wages and do very little to meet the needs of the day
laborers, who are then all the worse off because they must always be ready
to work due to their employment obligations and are therefore prevented
from pursuing other means of earning a living.

3. Improving the situation of lodgers.

Whether and how the situation of lodgers can be improved is a matter of
some debate; there is no radical remedy in Lippe, as is the case everywhere
else. In less cultivated areas, much can be achieved through internal
colonization. In Lippe, agriculture is also capable of higher development;
in particular, here, as almost everywhere else, the small rivers could
still be used in many ways for meadow cultivation; in the meantime,
agriculture cannot be developed to such a level that the large number of
tenant farmers already present could all be employed in agriculture . The
division of common land in our principality of Osnabrück has also had a
very detrimental effect on the status of landless rural dwellers
(farmhands), in that they can keep less livestock than was previously the
case; however, it has not yet become impossible for them to keep a cow, as
is the case in Lippe , where, however, the tenant farmers generally derived
less significant benefits from the common lands than our tenant farmers did
from the often very extensive boundaries. Incidentally, the benefits that
the tenant farmers derived from the right to graze a cow on the common
pasture are not considered very high, since, in order to keep it
profitably, at least 6–8 bushels of seed and a proportionate amount of
meadow land ; however, there are already too many residents in the country
to be able to provide them all with both; therefore, even before the
division of the common land, the cows were not kept by the residents to
their advantage . This may well be true, but it seems to us that a rural
farm, even a small one, without a cow is incomplete for that reason alone,
because then, apart from other advantages, the family must do without milk,
which is so nourishing and invigorating. In Lippe, instead of keeping a cow
for milk to go with their coffee,

Page 1113

people keep one or two goats, which are cheaper to maintain but do not
offer nearly as many benefits. Of course, butter is completely absent from
the household. However, there are still some lodgers who have so much land
that they can keep one or two cows, which are then also used to work the
fields; but these places are rented at a high price, and the butter usually
has to be sold for cash, so that lodgers of this kind cannot be called any
better off than the rest; in any case, however, they have better food.

As the conditions in Lippe have developed at present, it is not possible to
improve the situation of the lodgers in a radical way by transforming them,
as is still possible in our principality with the haymakers, from a
commercial population back into an agricultural one; for their numbers
have, at least in many places, so that this is no longer possible. Even if
every family wanted to keep just one cow, the lodgers would often have to
be given all the arable land. And even then, they would not be able to
manage without a sideline through which they could earn cash.

Therefore, even if the Lippe tenants cannot be turned into small farmers,
this does not rule out the possibility of improving their situation if they
are given the opportunity to engage in more agriculture overall, in
accordance with current conditions, than has been the case up to now.  It
would therefore be reasonable to demand that those It would therefore be
reasonable to demand that those landowners who wish to take in lodgers
provide them with adequate accommodation, at least a garden, and also a few
bushels of arable land, otherwise they should not be allowed to take them
in at all. Then only the larger landowners would take in lodgers would
take in lodgers who could care for them in times of need and give them the
opportunity to earn something, but not the small farmers who had only
recently emerged. If the latter now, as soon as they can build a room and
chamber, rent these to one or another lodger for 4–6 thaler or more, but
give them virtually no land, it is always highly likely that the people
will become impoverished and, even if not entirely supported by the
community, will still need assistance; for even if the man brings home 50
thaler or even more in pure money from his work abroad, this is still not
enough to feed a family throughout the year if almost all of their
necessities have to be purchased.  If all lodgers owned a small farm, the
so-called Frieslanders would also be more concerned with rural work and
learn how to do it, which is not currently the case, but is absolutely
necessary. If all lodgers owned a small farm, the so-called Frieslanders
would also be more concerned with rural work and learn it, which is not
currently the case, but will be absolutely necessary as soon as foreign
earnings decline, which has already happened under the current
circumstances.

Until now, the lodgers have still managed to make a living on the whole,
but the outlook is becoming bleaker. In addition to the foreign bricklaying
work, which has been adversely affected by the catastrophe, the road
construction in the country and the building of the neighboring railroad
also brought in some income. However, the railroad has been completed, and
there are not many more roads to be built, so that this source of income
cannot be counted on for very long.  If, nevertheless, the number of
lodgers continues to increase from year to year, the only result can be
general impoverishment.  This will be all the more likely to occur if
external income also declines, as has been the case for several years now.
The number of periodic emigrants must then decrease; but what if those who
remain cannot find permanent and sufficient employment in the country,

Page 1114

and the landowners also bring in foreign laborers because the locals do not
understand how to work the land?

This could be remedied in part if the Frisians, before they emigrate
periodically, or even afterwards, stayed in the country for at least a few
years and worked on the farms. Then they would become more familiar with
the local work and conditions; they would know how to keep themselves
better occupied in the wintertime, even if they emigrate, and the farm
owners would not need to bring in servants from abroad.  The only question
is how to achieve this, since it will not happen on its own. The simplest
thing would be if the farm owners were willing or able to pay their
servants wages as high as those earned abroad, but with this increase in
wages, even for workers, many farms would not be able to survive.  However,
it can be assumed that even with a slight increase in daily wages, many
brickworkers would prefer to stay in the country. Admittedly, this increase
in wages would be a sacrifice on the part of the farm owners, as they can
get servants more cheaply from abroad; but in the long run, they would
nevertheless benefit from it, as the inevitable consequences of increased
poverty would ultimately fall back on them. We do not dare to decide
whether it is feasible to intervene here through legislation, as has been
proposed.  However, it would certainly be useful if the Friesland migrants
could be encouraged to stay in their homeland for a few years in order to
become familiar with rural work. In the meantime, it is always very
questionable to interfere with people's livelihoods through police measures.

The tendency to emigrate periodically is now predominant. The fact that it
is increasing rather than decreasing is also due in particular to the fact
that young men want to live without ties, even if they have to do slave
labor for part of the year. This unbound life, which they lead more or less
during their presence in their homeland in winter and for which their
earnings in summer provide them with the means, can only have a detrimental
effect on the country, especially on the lower classes.  Partly necessary,
but also many useless expenses usually absorb their earnings completely.
There is a lack of sufficient employment in winter, which must always be
regarded as unfortunate and only provides opportunities for all kinds of
improprieties. The stability in life, which is so appropriate to rural
conditions and has such a beneficial effect on the inner man, is completely
lacking in these migrant residents. Although some young people may use part
of their earnings to support their parents and thereby indirectly
contribute to the common good, on the whole they do little for it. They
lack the noble drive to acquire their own lasting possessions, the true
thriftiness that holds together what has been acquired, and the joy of
owning their own possessions. But if a young man does not strive for his
own possessions in his early years, this will be to his great disadvantage
in the future.  For the most part, the young brickworkers, when they set
out on their travels again in the spring, have not gotten any further than
they were the year before. Their hard-earned money has disappeared from
their hands. A luxury that is not at all appropriate for the lower classes,
promoted by the relatively abundant earnings, and the pursuit of pleasure
have taken their toll; but there is no intention of creating a permanent
income base that can be increased through annual subsidies. It hardly needs
mentioning that the general introduction of savings banks would be very
beneficial; however, their existence alone, as we could cite examples to
show, is not enough; the inclination to use them must also be awakened.

Page 1115

It will have a great influence on the status of lodgers if the farm owners
take care of them in all circumstances and themselves preserve and develop
the activities that must remain characteristic of the farming class . Just
as a farm owner, if he preserves his characteristic peasant nature, grows
together with the land he cultivates, so too does he grow together with
those who live on it. There will be an interaction between him and the
lodgers. He will share his more comprehensive experience and his broader
knowledge of agriculture, gained through experimentation or instruction,
with the residents and seek to guide them by what has proven to be useful
and advantageous, whereas he can gain from their common sense, which is
often highly developed through the harsh school of deprivation and
strenuous activity.  He will be able to gain from their common sense, which
is often highly developed through the harsh school of deprivation and
strenuous activity.

Even if the knowledge of rural landowners in Lippe may have increased and
agriculture as a whole may be practiced with greater insight, and even if
external customs have improved insofar as gluttony is disappearing, it
cannot be denied that, as in so many regions, the characteristic customs,
traditional costumes, views, and indeed the entire external and internal
physiognomy are giving way to a more or less superficial polish. The High
German language is sometimes supplanting Low German, even though the latter
is intimately intertwined with peasant life in the countryside. The demands
on life are then increased, especially the formerly very simple peasant
economy, but essentially to its disadvantage, luxury and foreign customs
are introduced; dressed differently, people then consider themselves to be
of a different class, the old traditions are lost and with them the
strength of character. The sons and daughters of such larger farm owners
then believe they must lead a different life and often show little
inclination toward rural work, which is often left to the servants alone.
However, this only has a negative effect. Everyone who is a farmer must
have done all the work themselves, understand it for that reason, even if
they may not actually lend a hand with everything later on.  If a farmer
and his wife are not very active themselves, many opportunities are lost to
influence the lodgers, especially their children. These children,
especially the girls, are handed over to the farm owners and their wives
for education, as it were, immediately after leaving school and sometimes
even before, as they have to hire themselves out as early as possible.
What if both have little or no influence on them? Must these children not
grow up without discipline in the years when they most need guidance, and
therefore remain without a firm inner foundation?  The external
disadvantages are also significant, for there is a very big difference
between a young girl working under the constant guidance and supervision of
the housewife and one who is left more to her own devices.  In the past,
for example, farm wives took particular pride in achieving the greatest
possible perfection in all flax work, which requires great care throughout.
This care then automatically passed on to the maids who worked under their
eyes. At present, the linen industry is less profitable for larger farms
than it used to be, and therefore less care is taken. The dairymaids and
their daughters often pay very little attention to it anymore.  However,
given the great importance of this industry, not only for the landless
population in Lippe, but also in northwestern Germany in general, it is
urgently desirable that the larger landowners in particular pay greater
attention to it and do everything possible to produce better flax

Page 1116

and then process it with the utmost care. But this will never happen if
you don't grow flax yourself. The lodgers do not have the necessary land
for a properly rotating flax crop, and moreover, they cannot provide the
flax, which is one of the most exhausting crops and therefore requires a
lot of fertilization, with what it needs, especially if they don't even
keep a cow. If the flax is then processed very carefully, the hand-spun
linen will be less inferior to machine-woven fabrics in terms of its
appearance, and its smoothness and strength will make it more likely to
hold its own in southern markets, perhaps even replacing machine-woven
linen due to its superior qualities; for the latter cannot completely
replace hand-spun linen, and even less so when the yarn, as is usually the
case, is spun not from the full length of flax, but from fibers 2 to 3
inches long, while hand-spun yarn consists of fibers about a cubit long,
depending on the length of the flax. In this case, therefore, machine-spun
linen must have infinitely more points, hooks, and fibers protruding from
the surface than hand-spun linen, which, with its smoothness, is all the
more suitable for retaining the heat flowing from the body. The yarn also
loses its plant gum through the machines; this is because the water vapor
at 80 degrees Celsius through which the machine thread runs and the
perpendicular spindle dissolve the plant glue when the thread runs
horizontally and destroy the bast of the fibers, causing the durability,
smoothness, and stiffness to be lost to a large extent. Machine-made linen
is therefore far inferior to genuine hand-spun linen, which is why its
production should not be abandoned, but rather treated with the utmost care
so that it can match the uniformity of the threads and the external
appearance of the latter. Only if hand spinning seeks to perfect itself in
every respect will it be able to withstand competition from the spinning
machine. As everywhere else, in Lippe too, the landowners themselves must
first work towards this perfection of the linen industry if the landless
population is to be led to it. It is therefore wrong for the Meier women
and their daughters to increasingly abandon the linen industry, even if the
advantages are less than before; rather, they must take the lead in the
careful processing of flax and thereby exert an incalculable influence on
their maids, who are to be regarded as the future mainstay of the linen
industry. If they do not receive careful instruction in all the
manipulations necessary for flax preparation and processing at an early
age, it will certainly not be possible to expect anything outstanding from
them later on. If the farmers' daughters were more involved in the flax
industry, they themselves would also value linen much more highly than is
currently the case, take pleasure in acquiring it, enjoy wearing it, and
thereby counteract the pernicious luxury of clothing, which, despite all
the poverty, is so widespread among the propertyless classes, undermines
the prosperity of many families, and, unfortunately, is increasingly
seeking to replace linen as a clothing material in the country.

Although some of the lodgers have managed to keep their heads above water
despite all the unfavorable circumstances, impoverishment has generally
increased significantly in recent years, as evidenced by the rush for
assistance from municipal coffers and the prevalence of begging. This can
be attributed in part to the unfavorable years that have passed, but the
cause is more likely to be found in the relatively large increase in the
number of people without property, as has already been pointed out, which
no longer corresponds to the circumstances in the Principality of Lippe. We
have moved beyond the time when the highest state wisdom was to provide a

Page 1117

livelihood for as many people as possible, although the Lippe government
still believed a few years ago that it was advantageous to have as many
lodgers as possible. What matters is not that as many people as possible in
a country have a livelihood, however miserable it may be, but that this
livelihood is also beneficial for them and does not lead to moral decline.
If the livelihood of a population is not secured by sufficient means of
income, it must become impoverished, even if this impoverishment can be
halted for the time being by various means. The external disruption of life
then usually leads to an internal one, and people too often become
playthings of sin that is not combated by the power of a living faith. In
this temporal world, we need healthy earthly soil in order to live;
However, this has too often been forgotten, and instead it has been
believed that this ground would find itself if only the population were
allowed to multiply. However, if man ekes out a meager existence from one
day to the next, he necessarily degenerates spiritually, for he loses the
ability to absorb higher elements of life. It is true that luxury weakens
the spirit, whereas hardship often strengthens and ennobles the inner
man—through tribulation and suffering we are to enter the kingdom of
God—but this also has its limits. Apart from the fact that, with inadequate
Christian education, man does not use suffering for his inner purification,
in constant hardship the physical needs become so compelling that even if
higher elements of life were to be absorbed, they would be stifled, and the
whole direction of man would become more and more morally groundless. The
high calling of Christianity is to bring inner peace to people; but how is
this possible when the constant uncertainty of existence, the constant
worry: what shall we eat, what shall we drink, what shall we wear? prevents
people from finding inner peace, when instead of seeking the kingdom of
God, they are filled with an anxious quest for bread and a blind greed for
money! In accordance with their situation, the proletariat in Germany have
generally been called “fear workers”: the lodgers in Lippe must also be
described as such, for they cannot look to the future without fear, despite
all their work. But when this happens, must not morals become debased and
all vitality lost, so that the path that leads upward cannot be found?

In order to counteract the unchecked growth of the propertyless class in
Lippe, we believe it is absolutely necessary to enact legal provisions
prohibiting all landlords from taking in lodgers if they cannot provide
them with the necessary garden, arable land, and pasture according to local
conditions. We do not consider this to be any more of a restriction of
individual freedom than requiring a homeowner, in the interest of the
common good, to furnish their home in such a way that it does not pose a
fire hazard. Similarly, young people should not be allowed to marry if
there are no guarantees that they will be able to support themselves, but
rather if it is foreseeable that they will immediately fall into poverty.
As in general, we cannot wish for arbitrary and unnecessary obstacles to
marriage in relation to the Lippe lodgers; we must repeat what we have said
before, that the plight of the propertyless working class has become so
dire largely because the establishment of such households was permitted,
even though it was clear in advance that they would not be able to survive,
and as a result of which poverty has increased to such an

Page 1118

extent that even the greatest charity of the well-to-do cannot remedy it.
See the above-mentioned publication, p. 46 ff.

With particular reference to the situation in Lippe, we note that the new
municipal law introduced in 1842 does not seem to have had a favorable
effect on the mood of the lodgers. Although they are not materially
disadvantaged by it, it is rather the so-called  lodger's fee of 2½ thalers
to ½ thaler, and it is also collected with great consideration†; in
addition, of the seven contribution simplums of 5501 thalers each to the
municipal coffers, two are allocated to municipal road construction and
poor relief, which stimulates activity in the municipalities and provides
opportunities for earning income‡; only the provision that the lodger's
tax, together with the contribution simplum, is also transferred to the
municipal coffers and only the provision that the lodger's tax, together
with the contribution, is also allocated to the municipal treasury and used
for public support, seems to be thoroughly unpopular among those lodgers
who, through diligence, orderliness, and thrift, are still able to support
themselves.  They openly express that it would be best for them to let go
of everything they still possess, because They openly express that it would
also be best for them to simply let everything they still own go, because
then they would not only be exempt from paying the lodger's fee, but could
also expect to receive support. Even if such talk is not meant entirely
seriously by everyone, it at least reveals the mood of the people, and it
must be admitted that, especially in densely populated areas, a thoroughly
wrong spirit prevails among them, so that many are already insisting that
they must be supported.

If the residents were appropriately integrated into the village community
association and were also represented in the village council according to
their circumstances, this would certainly have a beneficial effect on their
mood. It would be particularly confidence-inspiring if a few reasonable
residents were to take part in the municipal council meetings, at which the
appropriate use of the allocated funds is also discussed, which could only
benefit the municipal council. This would probably also result in a more
appropriate and less unpopular welfare system. In any case, the system that
has been followed up to now cannot be continued any longer, because the
costs of poor relief have doubled in the last decade, and often in even
less time. In the district of S., with a population of approximately
11,000, they currently amount to around 3,500 thalers per year, and yet
begging has not ceased, despite the fact that police officers are specially
paid to prevent it; in particular, many children go around begging, which
means they are deprived of schooling and often ruined for life. It has been
shown that simply prohibiting begging does not help, despite the many
police officers and frequent transports of beggars. Almsgiving should also
be prohibited; instead, a poor relief commission should be established for
each locality, in any case not without the participation of the residents,
to which all requests for assistance would have to be submitted. It is not
our intention to elaborate further on the organization of poor relief here;
in any case, the church has an excellent role to play in this, as is also
recognized in Lippe, where it should not have been deprived of its
leadership, as has happened. Such a commission would then also have to
include the poor carers (deacons) to be appointed according to the model of
the early church, each of whom would be assigned a specific district for
special care.

Footnotes:

† However, indirect taxes have also been levied on residents due to the
accession to the Customs Union.
‡ Cf. Antze on the constitution of the Principality of Lippe in Bülau's
Yearbooks for History and Politics. 1845. Issue VII.

Page 1119

We would like to recommend Chalmers's writing on church care
for the poor, edited in German by O. v. Gerlach, for consideration in this
regard, especially since it shows how much can be achieved even with
limited resources, provided they are used in the right way. We cannot go
into detail here, but we would like to add the general remark that the main
focus of well-organized care for the poor must be on providing worthwhile
employment for those who are able to work, whereby the available labor
force, which often degenerates when isolated, like individual drops
trickling away without creating any significant benefit, should be combined
as far as possible in such a way that the work is fully utilized. If this
is not done, but instead it is believed that mere gifts can help, then the
available labor force is allowed to slacken instead of being strengthened,
thereby destroying more capital than can ever be replaced. Thus, attempts
to alleviate poverty will often only increase it.

As everywhere in northwestern Germany, emigration to America has recently
increased greatly in Lippe as well †; yet despite this, the population has
continued to grow. Although the desire to emigrate is strong, the Einlieger
(landless rural lodger), especially those with
families, usually lack the necessary means to do so.

It would be particularly appropriate if the younger children of landholding
farmers, who cannot marry into other hereditary farm holdings (Kolonate),
were to emigrate; for if they enter the status of Einlieger (landless rural
lodgers), they generally fare poorly, since from youth they have not been
accustomed to the cramped arrangements and the various privations that 
necessarily dfeine the household of an Einlieger.

However, it would first be necessary to abolish the provision in the
hereditary farm law (Kolonatsrecht) according to which their dowry from the
parental farm is presently released only upon marriage. Emigration would
thereby be facilitated, which is all the more desirable since, in a
condition of overpopulation such as exists in the Principality of Lippe, it
ultimately remains the principal means of counteracting increasing
impoverishment — although this does not exclude the use of other
appropriate measures.

In the long run, however, these measures will achieve nothing if there is
no land upon which the labor power of the propertyless population can
develop and find employment commensurate with their work. We believe we may
assert that such land is lacking in the Principality of Lippe, and that
little opportunity is offered to acquire it through internal agricultural
settlement and land development (innere Kolonisation), as is still possible
in other countries.

                           II.
In the Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe, the ratio of residents to land
area is much more favorable than in Lippe-Detmold, which is due to the fact
that, although Schaumburg-Lippe is more fertile, it is less densely
populated on average. According to the Journal of German Statistics (op.
cit.), there are 33,244 inhabitants per 10¾ square miles, meaning that each
square mile would support an average of 4,307 people. In 1840, the
population was 31,000; the average increase is 2.32 percent. The population
density is therefore much lower than in Lippe, which has a beneficial
effect on prosperity. Although the population has grown relatively more
than in Lippe, this growth has had fewer adverse consequences for the
prosperity of the country, as there are more sources of

Footnotes:

† Several landowners are said to have emigrated because the consistory
imposed the watered-down textbook of a former general superintendent on the
congregations instead of the Heidelberg Catechism. Cf. Janus from 1848.
Vol. I. p. 757.

Page 1120

income in the country itself and the number of inhabitants is by no means
disproportionate to the cultivated land.

The Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe is one of the most blessed landscapes
in northwestern Germany. It is part of the old county of Schaum- or
Schauenburg, which, in addition to the Hessian part of the same name, also
includes the Hanoverian districts of Lauenau, Lachem (now part of the
district of Hameln) and part of Blumenau.  The Schaumburg-Lippe or
Bückeburg part of the county is not crossed by the Weser River like the
Hessian part, but it is also less mountainous and therefore more uniformly
fertile. A blessed stretch in the Hessian part is the beautiful Weser
Valley, whereas in another valley, which is bordered on one side by the
Weser Mountains, the continuation of the Süntel, and on the other side by
the Bückeberge, and through which a small river, the Aue, trickles, the
soil is too uneven and stony to yield the same harvest as the more level
soil in Bückeburg. Only part of the district of Bückeburg is actually
mountainous, extending southwest beyond the Weser Mountains and including
the more isolated Harrl, on whose southeastern side the Eilsen mineral
springs bubble, while at the northern foot we find the residence of
Bückeburg on the border between mountainous land and plain. The districts
of Stadthagen and Hagenburg are predominantly flat.  The large Bückeberg,
distinguished by its beautiful sandstone quarries, from which the landscape
was once called the Bückigau and which the prince's residence still bears
the name, slopes gradually down towards the Schaumburg-Lippe side, whereas
on the Hessian side it drops steeply into the aforementioned valley.  From
this slope, the Most of this slope is on Schaumburg-Lippe and forms the
area in which the rich coal deposits are found, especially around Sülbeck
and Liekwegen. Part of the plain into which this slope merges is occupied
by the beautiful Schaumburg Forest.

These preliminary remarks already indicate that the situation of the
residents of the Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe must be far more
favorable than it can be in Lippe-Detmold. The population is entirely
appropriate for the land, and indeed, much more arable land could be gained
if the existing soil resources were better utilized. There is still great
scope for internal colonization here. Since the country has a wealth of
fuel in its rich coal deposits, the Schaumburg Forest, which occupies part
of the plain, could be converted into arable land without hesitation. The
water resources are very little used; for example, the small river Aue,
which rises in the Hessian part, flows wildly and seems to have almost no
other purpose than to flood the fields. Hydropower is very little used; for
example, the small river Aue, which rises in the Hessian part, flows wildly
and seems to have almost no other purpose than to drive mills, although
with its beautiful gradient it could be used to such obvious advantage for
meadow cultivation. The same is true of the other small rivers. The number
of lodgers is also far lower in relation to the rest of the population than
in the overpopulated Principality of Lippe, for only about two-thirds of
the rural population belong to the class of lodgers.

The relationship between the lodgers and the colonists is one of pure rent;
however, it is rare for lodgers to leave their dwellings. In the event of
disputes between the two parties, notices of termination may occur. It is
customary for the tenant farmer to be the day laborer for his colonist, in
return for which the colonist provides him with all the necessary
transportation and cultivates his leased land or, as they say in Bückeburg,
is his plowman. All these services have their traditional rates, which are
settled during the winter months.

Page 1121

There are also small tenant farmers (Brinksitzer) in Schaumburg-Lippe,
whose situation is usually worse than that of the lodgers, among whom there
are often relatively well-provided-for people who have insignificant
burdens to bear, whereas the small tenant farmers, as owners, are already
more subject to general and municipal charges.

Spinning and weaving have remained more of a sideline in Schaumburg-Lippe;
for this reason, the decline of the linen industry has had less of a
negative impact here than in areas where the landless rural population was
entirely dependent on it. Only in the Hagenburg district, especially around
Steinhude, is weaving done for larger sales, otherwise only for individual
orders on a small scale. The cultivation of flax and its processing are
very backward on the whole. Fertilization, sowing, treatment in the field,
rotting, braking, hackling, in short, the entire process until the thread
reaches the spinning wheel, leaves much to be desired. There has been
little talk here of changing this process, which is already being adopted
in other areas.

Far less than in Lippe-Detmold, the lodgers in Schaumburg-Lippe are engaged
in work abroad. Going to Holland to mow and also to catch herring has
declined considerably; the workers are going abroad more to work on larger
construction projects, e.g., to Hamburg after the fire, to Bremerhaven,
etc., and to field brickworks in the Landdrostei Stade and in Brandenburg.
It hardly needs mentioning that there are also many opportunities for
lodgers to find work in the country itself, more so than in some areas.
Mining alone employs a significant number of people throughout the year.
Less significant than in the Hessian part of the former county, in the
stone quarries at Bückeberge, is the work in the stone quarries at Harrl.
The extensive forests and road construction also provide some employment.
One of the main tasks of the lodgers is to perform services. In the
Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe, the abolition of manorial dues and
services has not yet taken place.  For the larger tenant farmers, the
residents usually take on manual labor in return for payment or, as it is
called, perform days of service. Usually, these larger tenant farmers are
on good terms with the service farmers, so that instead of them, certain
residents, often from other tenant farms and other villages, are called
upon.

The lodgers do not contribute to the municipal expenses. The obligation to
contribute to the construction of country roads through land services is
redeemed annually by most colonists through the payment of four
contribution simels.  The roads are therefore usually repaired and
maintained by day laborers who earn 9 marks per day. This work can also be
regarded as a major source of income for the lodgers.

It is a great advantage for the residents that in Schaumburg-Lippe the
common lands have remained undivided until now; their cattle are driven
onto them in exchange for shepherd's wages.

While in other regions there are widespread complaints about extravagant
clothing, even among the lower classes, and while flashy finery is becoming
very prevalent, Schaumburg-Lippe, like the neighboring region in general,
must be praised for preserving the old “hearty” traditional costume, as
they say in Westphalia, has been preserved, which has had the most
beneficial consequences for the propertyless population. In few other areas
has this peasant costume defied every fashion and every, even the
slightest, change in cut and fabric. In its entirety, which is what even
the poorest farmhand and the poorest maid strive for, it is by no means
cheap, but rather very expensive; but it is also extremely durable, and
every garment that gets dirty can be washed.

Page 1122

If anywhere, it is in this clothing that heartiness can be found. It is the
same for summer and winter; however, only when it is cold are all the
layers worn together, whereas one or the other is removed depending on how
warm it is. When all the layers are worn together, it is warm and yet
perfectly suited for work, light, cooling, and comfortable when the layers
are removed. In the height of summer, for example when haying, the boy
wears a shirt and three-quarter-length trousers and only puts on a sleeved
vest when going back and forth. When wood is transported in winter, three
shirts, three pairs of trousers, two to three sleeveless vests (no other
types are known) and a white linen, lined smock are worn, and the trim of
the fur hat is tucked into the neck. Similarly, depending on the season,
the women add or remove various layers of clothing. They have their own
custom of replacing the bright red skirts they usually wear to church with
black or brown ones for communion. A blue cloth skirt with wide tails and
large buttoned buttons is the clothing worn by men when going to church and
at funerals.  Usually, the skirt is purchased at the time of marriage and
then lasts for a lifetime. The lack of church attire is considered a sign
of poverty. We hardly need to add that the excellent, dignified traditional
costume of the peasantry has a beneficial effect on their inner being and
protects them from many of the evils with which the farmhands in a large
part of our principality of Osnabrück have to contend; for here, especially
in the north, the old national costume has almost completely disappeared,
which has also led to the displacement of local clothing fabrics, bringing
untold disadvantages to the working class, which has now become dependent
on changing fashions. We can therefore only hope that in Schaumburg-Lippe,
as well as everywhere else where national costumes are still worn by the
peasantry, these will be preserved throughout the ages and will help to
maintain the characteristic nature of this class and protect it from a
general leveling that would cause class customs and honor to disappear.
